---
title: 'CSM 16A: Overleaf to Git Transition Guide'
date: 2023-05-26
permalink: /teaching-csm16a/migration-guide/
tags:
  - CSM16A
---

In this guide, I will be discussing the transition process from Overlead to Git-Local setup for our content team. We find that the transition from Overleaf to Git will take several transformations depending on the exact content templates each course uses. As we implement this transformation, we are also able to base our efforts on CSM61A's content team repository files and successfully adapt EECS 16A's Worksheet format onto the provided files.

Introduction
======
While Overleaf provides a friendly entry into LaTeX writing and compilation, we find that Overleaf causes many organization-wise defects, such as poor user interface design and indirect encouragement of not fixing LaTeX errors.Meanwhile, Git-Local setup of CSM Content Team is an ongoing transformation throughout each courses as of the time of writing.

To comply with the idea of "Using Git for long-term projects" and help establish Git as the state-of-the-art method for CSM content organization, we write the following guide to detail the transition process from an Overleaf-managed content repository to a Github-hosted content repository employing local LaTeX distributions.

This is a complicated process for even senior content mentors to complete at once. To aid transition, I complete most of the transitions and detail my works in this guide, so readers will only have to follow the instructions for compiling a worksheet and orient themselves around the new version of content repository using this guide.

In this guide we will cover the following policies.
**Only SCMs have to understand bolded items**:
- [Installing LaTeX Locally](#installing-latex-locally)
- [Setting up GitHub Connection on Local Device](#setting-up-github-connection-on-local-device)
- [**Navigating The New Content Repository**](#navigating-the-new-content-repository)
- [Git-Local Version of Worksheet Template](#git-local-version-of-worksheet-template)
- [**Composing Worksheets**](#composing-worksheets)
- [Version Control Principles](#version-control-principles)
- [**Recycling Questions in Overleaf Format**](#recycling-questions-in-overleaf-format)

Installing LaTeX Locally
======

Setting up GitHub Connection on Local Device
======

Navigating The New Content Repository
======

Git-Local Version of Worksheet Template
======

Composing Worksheets
======

Version Control Principles
======

Recycling Questions in Overleaf Format
======
